IBX-5706: DDEV usage (#1983)
ibexa/documentation-developer: docs/infrastructure_and_maintenance/clustering/clustering_using_ddev.md

    - [`ddev ssh`](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/commands/#ssh) opens a terminal inside a service.
    - [`ddev exec`](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/commands/#exec) executes a command inside a service.

    [Discover more commands in DDEV documentation](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/commands/).

To run an Ibexa Cloud project locally, you may refer to [Ibexa Cloud and DDEV](ibexa_cloud_and_ddev.md) instead.

## Install search engine

A [search engine](search_engines.md) can be added to the cluster.

### Elasticsearch

The following commands:

1. adds the Elasticsearch container,
1. sets it up as the search engine,
1. restarts the DDEV cluster and clear application cache,
1. then injects the schema and reindex the content.

```bash
ddev get ddev/ddev-elasticsearch
ddev config --web-environment-add SEARCH_ENGINE=elasticsearch
ddev config --web-environment-add ELASTICSEARCH_DSN=http://elasticsearch:9200
ddev restart
ddev php bin/console cache:clear
ddev php bin/console ibexa:elasticsearch:put-index-template
ddev php bin/console ibexa:reindex
```

You can now check that Elasticsearch works.

> For example, `ddev exec curl -s "http://elasticsearch:9200/_count"`
> 
> - tests that the `web` server is accessing the `elasticsearch` server,
> - displays the number of indexed documents.

Author: @dabrt 
```suggestion
For example, the `ddev exec curl -s "http://elasticsearch:9200/_count"` command checks whether the `web` server can access the `elasticsearch` server and displays the number of indexed documents.
```

See [ddev/ddev-elasticsearch README](https://github.com/ddev/ddev-elasticsearch) for more information on topics such as memory management.

> See [Elasticsearch REST API reference](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/rest-apis.html) for more request possibilities like

Author: @dabrt As those requests can't be combined with each others into a single request, I'll stay with the following:
```suggestion
See [Elasticsearch REST API reference](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/rest-apis.html) for more request options, like, for example:
```
What do you think?

> - the [`_count`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-count.html) from the above test,
> - or [`_cluster/health`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/cluster-health.html) (don't mind the "yellow" status),
> - or [`_search?size=0"`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-search.html) (which is another way to get document count).

Author: The yellow status is globally explained in the linked documentation. Anyway, there is no explanation why this is normal in the DDEV case. @dabrt What about this?:

```suggestion
- [`_count`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-count.html), as seen above
- [`_cluster/health`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/cluster-health.html) (don't mind the "yellow" status which is normal in the absence of replicas in the DDEV container)
- [`_search?size=0"`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-search.html), which is another way to get document count
```

In the following examples:

- the same service is used to store both persistence cache and sessions,
- the session handler is set on Symfony side, not on PHP side.

### Install Redis

The following command lines

1. add the Redis container,
1. set up Redis as the cache pool,
1. set up Redis as the session handler,
1. change `maxmemory-policy` from default `allkeys-lfu` to a [value accepted by the `RedisTagAwareAdapter`](https://github.com/symfony/cache/blob/5.4/Adapter/RedisTagAwareAdapter.php#L95),
1. restart the DDEV cluster and clear application cache.

```bash
ddev get ddev/ddev-redis
ddev config --web-environment-add CACHE_POOL=cache.redis
ddev config --web-environment-add CACHE_DSN=redis
ddev config --web-environment-add SESSION_HANDLER_ID='Ibexa\\Bundle\\Core\\Session\\Handler\\NativeSessionHandler'
ddev config --web-environment-add SESSION_SAVE_PATH=tcp://redis:6379
sed -i 's/maxmemory-policy allkeys-lfu/maxmemory-policy volatile-lfu/' .ddev/redis/redis.conf;
ddev restart
ddev php bin/console cache:clear
```

You can now check that Redis works.

> For example, `ddev redis-cli MONITOR` outputs such as `"SETEX" "ezp:`, `"MGET" "ezp:`, `"SETEX" "PHPREDIS_SESSION:`, `"GET" "PHPREDIS_SESSION:`, etc. while navigating into the website, in particular the Back Office.

Author: I made a confusion between "to output such as…" and "to output something like…" or "to output lines such as…"

"to return outputs such as…" sounds already better. 

@dabrt What do you think of the following?

```suggestion
For example, the `ddev redis-cli MONITOR` command returns outputs such as `"SETEX" "ezp:`, `"MGET" "ezp:`, `"SETEX" "PHPREDIS_SESSION:`, `"GET" "PHPREDIS_SESSION:`, etc. while navigating into the website, in particular the Back Office.
```

---

> description: When you want to run locally a cluster infrastructure using DDEV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: How to run a cluster infrastructure using DDEV locally.
```

---

# Clustering using DDEV

> This guide follows [Getting started: Install using DDEV](../../getting_started/install_using_ddev.md) and helps to extend the previous installation to replicate locally a production [cluster](clustering.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide follows [Install using DDEV](install_using_ddev.md) and helps to extend the previous installation to locally replicate a production [cluster](clustering.md).
```

> Contrary to production cluster, there will be only one front app server. But the data sharing needed by a cluster of several servers can still be emulated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast to a production cluster, this setup will have only one front app server.
But the data sharing needed by a cluster of several servers can still be emulated.
```

The `ddev config --php-version` option should set the same PHP version as the production servers.

!!! caution

>     This is not to be used in production.

Reviewer: I'd move this warning to the top of the page, if it refers to the whole procedure

Author: Done in 6c463bd4ea435441bb9c69f89724112f2461bd09

>     And a staging environment for validation before production should replicat exactly the production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A staging environment for validation before production should exactly replicate the production environment.
```

    This is meant for development environment only.

!!! tip
 

>     - [`ddev describe`](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/commands/#describe) display a summary of the cluster including accesses from inside and outside DDEV services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`ddev describe`](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/commands/#describe) displays a summary of the cluster including accesses from inside and outside DDEV services.
```

    - [`ddev ssh`](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/commands/#ssh) opens a terminal inside a service.
    - [`ddev exec`](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/commands/#exec) executes a command inside a service.

>     [Discover more commands on DDEV documentation](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/commands/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [Discover more commands in DDEV documentation](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/commands/).
```

<!-- TODO: Document [`ddev get --remove`](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/extend/additional-services/#viewing-and-removing-installed-add-ons) when DDEV 1.22 is out https://github.com/ddev/ddev/milestone/54 -->

> To run locally an Ibexa Cloud project, you may refer to _[Ibexa Cloud and DDEV](ibexa_cloud_and_ddev.md)_ instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run an Ibexa Cloud project locally, you may refer to [Ibexa Cloud and DDEV](ibexa_cloud_and_ddev.md) instead.
```

<!-- ## TODO: Install Varnish -->

## Install search engine

> A [search engine](../../search/search_engines.md) can be added to the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [search engine](search_engines.md) can be added to the cluster.
```

### Elasticsearch

> The following command lines will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following commands will:
```

1. add the Elasticsearch container,
1. set it up as the search engine,
1. restart the DDEV cluster and clear application cache,
1. then inject the schema and reindex the content.

```bash
ddev get ddev/ddev-elasticsearch
ddev config --web-environment-add SEARCH_ENGINE=elasticsearch
ddev config --web-environment-add ELASTICSEARCH_DSN=http://elasticsearch:9200
ddev restart
ddev php bin/console cache:clear
ddev php bin/console ibexa:elasticsearch:put-index-template
ddev php bin/console ibexa:reindex
```

You can now check that Elasticsearch works properly.

For example, `ddev exec curl -s "http://elasticsearch:9200/_count"` will

> - test that the `web` server is accessing `elasticsearch` server,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- test that the `web` server is accessing the `elasticsearch` server,
```

- display the number of indexed documents.

> See [ddev/ddev-elasticsearch's README](https://github.com/ddev/ddev-elasticsearch) for more like memory management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [ddev/ddev-elasticsearch README](https://github.com/ddev/ddev-elasticsearch) for more information on topics such as memory management.
```

See [Elasticsearch REST API reference](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/rest-apis.html) for more request possibilities like

- the [`_count`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-count.html) from the above test,
- or [`_cluster/health`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/cluster-health.html) (don't mind the "yellow" status),
- or [`_search?size=0"`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-search.html) (which is another way to get document count).

!!! tip

    [`jq`](https://jqlang.github.io/jq/) can be used to format and colorize Elasticsearch REST API outputs

### Solr

> To ease the installation of Solr, the specific add-on `ibexa/ddev-solr` can be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To simplify the installation of Solr, you can use the `ibexa/ddev-solr` add-on:
```

```bash
ddev get ibexa/ddev-solr
ddev restart
```

You can now test that Solr works properly.

For example, `ddev exec curl -s http://solr:8983/api/cores/` will

> - test that the `web` server is accessing `solr` server,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- test that the `web` server is accessing the `solr` server,
```

- test `collection1` existence and status,

> - display `collection1`'s `numDocs` that should non-zero if indexing worked correctly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- display `collection1`'s `numDocs` that should not be zero if indexing worked correctly. 
```

> The Solr admin can be accessed from the host by using the port 8983 on the same `.ddev.site` subdomain than the front. Use `ddev describe` to have that URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Solr admin can be accessed from the host by using the port 8983 on the same `.ddev.site` subdomain as the front. Use `ddev describe` to get that URL.
```

## Share cache and sessions

> A [persistence cache pool](../cache/persistence_cache.md#persistence-cache-configuration) and a [session handler](../sessions.md#session-handlers) can be added to the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add a [persistence cache pool](persistence_cache.md#persistence-cache-configuration) and a [session handler](sessions.md#session-handlers) to the cluster.
```

> In the following examples,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following examples:
```

- the same service will be used to store both persistence cache and sessions,
- the session handler will be set on Symfony side, not on PHP side.

### Install Redis

The following command lines

1. add the Redis container,
1. set up Redis as the cache pool,
1. set up Redis as the session handler,
1. change `maxmemory-policy` from default `allkeys-lfu` to a [value accepted by the `RedisTagAwareAdapter`](https://github.com/symfony/cache/blob/5.4/Adapter/RedisTagAwareAdapter.php#L95),
1. restart the DDEV cluster and clear application cache.

```bash
ddev get ddev/ddev-redis
ddev config --web-environment-add CACHE_POOL=cache.redis
ddev config --web-environment-add CACHE_DSN=redis
ddev config --web-environment-add SESSION_HANDLER_ID='Ibexa\\Bundle\\Core\\Session\\Handler\\NativeSessionHandler'
ddev config --web-environment-add SESSION_SAVE_PATH=tcp://redis:6379
sed -i 's/maxmemory-policy allkeys-lfu/maxmemory-policy volatile-lfu/' .ddev/redis/redis.conf;
ddev restart
ddev php bin/console cache:clear
```

You can now check that Redis works properly.

> For example, `ddev redis-cli MONITOR` will show some `"SETEX" "ezp:`, `"MGET" "ezp:`, `"SETEX" "PHPREDIS_SESSION:`, `"GET" "PHPREDIS_SESSION:`, etc. while navigating into the website, in particular the Back Office.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, `ddev redis-cli MONITOR` will output such as `"SETEX" "ezp:`, `"MGET" "ezp:`, `"SETEX" "PHPREDIS_SESSION:`, `"GET" "PHPREDIS_SESSION:`, etc. while navigating into the website, in particular the Back Office.
```

> See [Redis commands](https://redis.io/commands/) for more details like about the [`MONITOR`](https://redis.io/commands/monitor/) used in the previous example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Redis commands](https://redis.io/commands/) for more details such as information about the [`MONITOR`](https://redis.io/commands/monitor/) used in the previous example.
```

### Install Memcached

> First, if not already there, append the following [new service](https://doc.ibexa.co/en/latest/infrastructure_and_maintenance/sessions/#handling-sessions-with-memcached) to `config/config/services.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, if not already there, append the following [new service](https://doc.ibexa.co/en/latest/infrastructure_and_maintenance/sessions/#handling-sessions-with-memcached) to `config/services.yaml`:
```

```yaml
    app.session.handler.native_memcached:
        class: Ibexa\Bundle\Core\Session\Handler\NativeSessionHandler
        arguments:
            - '%session.save_path%'
            - memcached
```

Second, install and set up the add-on.

> The following command lines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following commands:
```
